---
post_title: TSC Operations and Policy Manual
author: Admin
post_date: 2015-02-20 02:55:00
post_excerpt:
layout: page
permalink: http://tech.fhiso.org/opm/
---

# Technical Standing Committee Operations and Policy Manual of the Family
History Information Standards Organisation, Inc.

*Approved by the FHISO Board and published on 28 August 2014.*

Authors/Contributors:

-   Neil Parker
-   Geir Thorud
-   Luther Tychonievich
-   Richard Smith

* * * * *

This manual accompanies the Technical Standing Committee (TSC) Charter,
as specified in the Bylaws of the Family History Information Standards
Organisation, Inc. This manual is principally concerned with the
procedures and practises of the various Project Teams and Exploratory
Groups of the Family History Information Standards Organisation.

1. The Standard Development Process
===================================

A new or updated standard shall go through the following steps in
sequence. The process may be abandoned at any step, and may result in
deliverables other than the core deliverables identified in this
section.

1.1. Idea Generation
--------------------

An idea for a new standard or new area needing standardisation may be
generated from any source. The FHISO Call for Papers and the mailing
list tsc-public@fhiso.org are provided by the TSC as ways to facilitate
idea generation; however, neither need to be used for an idea to appear.

In most cases, the deliverable produced at the end of the idea
generation phase is an Exploratory Group Proposal. This proposal is used
by the TSC to create an Exploratory Group, as outlined in section 3.1.

The TSC has the ability turn an idea directly into a Project Proposal if
they deem that there is not enough unresolved exploratory work for the
formation of an Exploratory Group to be justified.

1.2. Exploratory Work
---------------------

Some exploration of an idea is required before a project team can be
formed. Exploration defines the scope of the possible standard and
verifies that there are sufficient interest and resources to justify
full standards development by a project team. Effort should be made to
identify possible obstacles to open standard development (such as
intellectual property concerns) during the exploratory phase.

Most often, exploratory work is performed by an Exploratory Group.
However, the TSC may state that the exploratory work has been performed
by some individual or individuals who were not part of an exploratory
group, perhaps as a byproduct of idea generation phase.

The exploratory stage will normally include a review of prior art in the
field. This may include the behaviour of applications in common use, the
content of previous standards and data models (in particular GEDCOM),
and previous research done by third parties. Where applicable, the
exploratory stage shall identify any requirements for backwards and
forwards compatibility, and produce a recommendation on the scope of
future FHISO work in the field.

The deliverable produced at the end of the exploratory work is a Project
Proposal. This proposal is used by the TSC to create a Project Team, as
outlined in section 4.1.

1.3. Project Development
------------------------

A proposed standard is developed by a Project Team. No standard may be
proposed without going through a project team devoted to that standard.

The deliverable produced at the end of the project development is a
proposed standard suitable for vote by the general FHISO membership. It
is expected, though not required, that the standard be accompanied by an
executive summary accessible to members of FHISO whose primary interest
lies in areas of FHISO's work that is unrelated to the standard being
proposed.

1.4. TSC and Board Approval
---------------------------

Before a proposed standard is voted on by the general FHISO membership,
it must be declared ready for vote by the TSC. In particular, the TSC
shall vote on each of the items below:

1.  The proposed standard is clear and unambiguous.

2.  The process used to generate the standard followed the principles
    outlined in section 6 of this document.

3.  Reasonable steps have been taken to ensure the proposed standard is
    free from legal issues such as patents and other intellectual
    property concerns.

4.  The proposed standard does not unfairly advantage or disadvantage
    any particular group or company.

5.  The proposed standard contains any necessary summaries, examples, or
    other supporting material.

6.  The proposed standard does not materially exceed its scope as
    defined in the project's directives.

7.  The proposed standard achieves all of its objectives as defined in
    the project's directives.

8.  Reasonable steps have been taken to discover and correct problems in
    the proposed standard, and any remaining known issues are
    sufficiently minor that they can be fixed in subsequent errata.

A separate vote shall be taken by the TSC on each item above. If and
only if the TSC approves all of the items above, they shall then vote on
one more item:

9.  The proposed standard is recommended to the Board and general
    membership for their consideration.

If all of the above items are approved by the TSC, the proposed standard
is then referred to the FHISO board for their consideration. The board
shall have two weeks (14 days) in which to review the proposed standard
and raise any objections. If no objections are raised then the proposed
standard shall be deemed a recommended standard and proceed to the next
phase of standard approval.

1.5. General Vote
-----------------

Each recommended standard shall be made available to the general public.
The TSC should work with the Membership Standing Committee to announce
its recommended status to the FHISO membership and the general public.

A recommended standard does not become a standard until approved by a
vote of the general FHISO membership. These votes are administered by
the Executive Committee in accordance with the Bylaws and the Vote
Administration Policy. The vote should be scheduled no less than 60 days
after its recommended status was announced to the FHISO membership and
no more than 365 days after it became a recommended standard.

If the recommended standard passes by a simple majority of the votes
cast, it shall become a full standard and proceed to the next phase of
standard approval. If it does not pass by a simple majority it shall be
identified as a "rejected standard proposal" and published along with
the results of the vote.

1.6. Publication
----------------

If a standard is approved, is is published on the fhiso.org website and
made available without fee or royalty by FHISO. Every published standard
created by FHISO will be available from FHISO as long as FHISO shall
last.

1.7. Appendices, Errata, and Clarified Drafts
---------------------------------------------

A standard, once published, is immutable. No edits of any kind may be
performed.

The TSC may approve and publish three kinds of updates to a published
standard without requiring a vote of the full FHISO membership:

1.  Appendices may be added that expand on portions of the standard. An
    appendix that is added after a standard is approved may not change
    the meaning of the standard in any way, but may simplify the process
    of understanding the standard or of creating an artifact that
    complies with the standard.

2.  Errata may be issued that describe changes to the standard. These
    changes should be limited to correcting spelling or grammar, adding
    cross-references or citations, or minor re-wording to add clarity.
    Errata may not change the meaning of the standard; for example, if
    an ambiguity is identified within the standard an erratum may
    identify and make more explicit that ambiguity but it may not remove
    it.

    Errata should not impact section, list, or paragraph numbering.

3.  A "clarified draft" version of a standard may be issued that applies
    the errata. Such a version shall clearly identify itself as a draft
    that has not received full FHISO approval as a standard; it shall
    also contain prominent links to the original standard and to the set
    of errata that it has applied.

1.8. Follow Up Work
-------------------

FHISO may establish additional activities that take place after a
standard has been published. These might include efforts to promote and
certify standards compliance or to solicit and collect suggestions for
changes to be made in future versions of the standard. Specifics of
post-publication activities are beyond the scope of this document.

Standards may be revised from time to time. For the purpose of this
document, a revised version of a standard is a separate standard, and
will be developed following the process outlined in this section.

2. Policies for all Technical Groups
====================================

Exploratory Groups (EG) and Project Teams (PT) are collectively referred
to as Technical Groups (TG). General policies for all TGs are given in
section 4 of the TSC Charter. In particular,

-   TG work shall be consensus-based.

-   TG work shall conform to any Executive Committee and TSC policies,
    including policies governing appeals, meetings, and document style.

The TSC shall appoint a Coordinator for each TG who shall chair TG
meetings. The working language in all TG meetings and documents will be
English.

Appeal should rarely be needed by a TG. If frequent appeals are made
within a particular TG, the TSC should strive to identify and rectify
the source of the issue, possibly dissolving or restructuring the TG.

FHISO members may request to become members of a TG by contacting the
TSC, or the TSC may after consultation with the TG Coordinator invite a
FHISO member to become a member of a TG.

New members of a TG and members that are returning after a period of
inactivity are considered Transitional Members and their votes are not
considered in determining majority or consensus. Details regarding
Transitional Member status may be found in section 4 of the the TSC
Charter.

If a member of a TG has a vested interest in a particular outcome or a
potential conflict of interest with the TG's work, the member is
required to make that known to the TG Coordinator (or to the TSC if the
member in question is the TG Coordinator). The TG Coordinator may inform
other TG members as deemed appropriate by the TG Coordinator. A member
with a declared interest is not barred from participating in consensus
building or from voting on any matter under consideration.

3. Policies for Exploratory Groups
==================================

Exploratory Groups (EG) are a type of Technical Group and are governed
by all policies that apply to other Technical Groups, as outlined in
section 2 of this document.

3.1. Exploratory Group Formation
--------------------------------

Any FHISO member (the Proposer) can, after consultation with the TSC
coordinator, propose the establishment of an EG by submitting a proposal
to the TSC. The TSC can also propose an EG directly.

EG proposals should detail the parameters in which the proposed EG is to
operate. Detailed technical proposals should be put in CFPS papers
accompanying the EG proposal, rather than the in the EG proposal itself.

EG proposals shall be reviewed by the TSC or a subcommittee assigned by
the TSC. If the proposal has significant problems it should be returned
to the proposer with comments regarding how they might be addressed.

Reviewed proposals shall be published and announced publicly by the TSC.
The announcement shall include a way for members to notify their intent
to participate in the EG to the Proposer.

If significant problems or improvements are identified after announcing
an EG proposal, the TSC may suspend the proposal and return it to the
proposer with comments.

An EG proposal may be approved by the TSC and the EG formed once all of
the following conditions are met:

1.  At least three members have committed to participate in the EG.

2.  At least 11 days have elapsed since the EG proposal was published
    and announced.

3.  At least one person (generally the Proposer) has expressed
    willingness to serve as the EG Coordinator.

If the proposal fails to get the required support, the Proposer may
withdraw the proposal. Six months after a proposal is filed, or any time
thereafter, the TSC may classify any proposal that lacks sufficient
support as rejected; however, there is no requirement to do this.

The current procedure for performing each of these steps is outlined on
http://fhiso.org/tsc, or on a page linked from that web portal, and may
be updated from time to time as the TSC deems appropriate.

3.2. Exploratory Group Operation
--------------------------------

When the TSC approves a new EG it also provides the EG with a set of
Directives based on the proposal. EGs may propose changes to their
Directives to the TSC.

The EG has a Coordinator appointed by the TSC. The Coordinator may
appoint a recorder, editor, and/or other offices within the EG as
needed. The Coordinator is responsible for providing regular updates on
the work of the EG to the TSC, which shall normally be made public.

Participation in an EG is open to all and the TSC will not normally deny
requests by FHISO member to join an EG. Because exploratory groups are
not producing documents or recommendations intended for approval as
FHISO standards, participation in EGs is less restricted than it is for
project teams or among FHISO officers. An individual who is an Associate
per by-law 5.2 may participate in an EG as an associate member. EG
associate members do not have their votes counted in determining
consensus and may not serve in a leadership role within the EG, but they
may be given as large a role in furthering the EG's work as any other
group member.

The work of an EG should ordinarily be carried out in public, and it
should seek to engage with the wider community. The TSC will provide
each EG with a public mailing list to facilitate this.

3.3. Exploratory Group Deliverables
-----------------------------------

The result of the work in an EG is one or more of the following
deliverables:

-   Project Proposals for new Projects;

-   proposals for new EGs;

-   recommendations that the TSC update the Directives of a TG; and/or

-   Technical Group Notes to inform the work of other TGs.

The TSC may return any deliverables to the EG for further work with
comments on the particular issues that need addressing.

Where an EG has been unable to produce the expected deliverables, it
should at least produce a Technical Group Note summarising why it was
unable to do so. Technical Group Notes shall be approved by the TSC and
then published and announced to members. Technical Group Notes are not
Standards and do not bind the future actions of the TSC.

Once EG has produced all its deliverables, its Coordinator should
request that the TSC dissolve the EG. When notice is given that an EG is
to be dissolved, whether at the request of its Coordinator or otherwise,
its Coordinator shall produce a final report summarising the work of the
EG, including a review of how EG policies and procedures could be
improved. The report is approved by the TSC, after which the EG is
dissolved.

4. General policies for Project Teams
=====================================

Project Teams (PT) are a type of Technical Group and are governed by all
policies that apply to other Technical Groups, as outlined in section 2
of this document.

4.1. Project Team Formation
---------------------------

A PT is established after approval of a Project Proposal developed by an
EG, or a proposal developed by the TSC without a preceding EG.

The proposal shall normally include a recommendation on the broad
substance of the standard to be produced. It will also normally include
recommendations on major decisions, particularly those likely to impact
the work of other PTs.

The proposal shall be reviewed by the TSC. If the proposal has problems
preventing its approval it should be returned to the EG with comments
regarding how those problems might be addressed. The TSC may merge
several project proposals into a single proposal or split a proposal
into several separate ones.

The proposal shall be published to the FHISO membership at least 11 days
before the TSC approves the proposal. During this period members may
comment on the proposal and may notify their intent to participate in
the PT to the TSC or an appointed member of the EG, unless the TSC has
decided to limit participation and to appoint all members of the PT.

A simple majority vote of the TSC voting members is required to approve
the creation of projects working on standards. If the TSC rejects a
project proposal, it has to provide the reason for this, in writing, to
be published together with the voting result.

4.2. Project Team Operation
---------------------------

The directives for the PT are developed and approved by the TSC when the
proposal to establish a PT is approved. The initial set of directives
are based on the proposal. The directives are published and announced
publicly. The PT may later propose changes to the directives; if the TSC
approves the changes the changed directives are also published. The TSC
may also change the directives based on proposals from EGs or others.

Each PT has a coordinator and co-coordinator, both appointed by the TSC.
PT Recorders are appointed by the PT Coordinator; if there are no
project recorders, the PT Coordinator is responsible for filling the
role. Other members of FHISO may also register to work on the Project.

The coordinator of each PT is given a seat on the TSC by virtue of that
coordinator role. This is true even if other members of the PT already
have seats on the TSC. If the coordinator already has a seat on the TSC
in some other capacity, then being given a seat by virtue of being a PT
coordinator has no effect.

Some PTs may have directives that do not involve the creation or
refinement of standards. These teams are governed more loosely that
standards-effort PTs. For example, the TSC may chose to limit
participation in a non-standards-effort PT by appointing the project
members. The quorum and the percentage of "Yes" votes required for
approval may also be defined on a per-team basis for non-standards PTs.

4.3. Project Team Deliverables
------------------------------

Project Teams maintain meeting minutes and produce reports in the form
of status/milestone reports, proposed changes to the Project Directives
or deliverables.

The work of the Project Team results in (part of) a Proposed Standard or
other deliverable as described in the Project Directive. If the PT
determines that producing this primary deliverable is not advisable or
not feasible, they instead produce a document describing why the primary
deliverable can/should not be produced at this time. Project Teams may
also produce Technical Group Notes and proposals for new EGs or PTs.

Project Teams shall from time to time publish Working Drafts of the
standard they are producing, and shall keep track of issues reported
regarding the drafts, whether reported by team members or by members of
the general public.

The TSC may dissolve or suspend PTs. After a Proposed Standard is
produced, a PT may continue to work on new versions of the standard or
other work described in the project directives. If a PT is dissolved
without proposing a Proposed Standard, the PT coordinator is responsible
for producing a final report of PT activities.

5. Policies of all Deliverables
===============================

All documents published by the TSC or its supervised groups, including
but not limited to

-   submissions to the Call for Papers

-   external documents produced by a TG, including all deliverables

-   policy statements, such as this document

-   proposed, recommended, and approved standards

will be archived and made available to the public even if they are later
superseded by another document. Each such published document should also
abide by the following criteria:

1.  The main content of each document must either be self contained or
    rely only on other FHISO published documents. The meaning of the
    document should not depend on any of its Citations, URIs, or other
    references to documents, websites, or similar information sources.

    As an exception to this rule, the TSC, the Executive Committee, or
    the Board of FHISO may approve particular documents produced by
    other standards organisations as acceptable to reference by citation
    even if the content of said documents are integral to the meaning of
    FHISO-produced documents.

2.  The documents should not contain any inappropriate information.
    Inappropriate information includes:

    -   Sensitive personal information about any living person.

    -   Slanderous, libellous, insulting, or inflammatory language.

    -   Content that violates copyright, patent, or other intellectual
        property law.

    Documents containing inappropriate information should be prevented
    from being published until the inappropriate material is removed.

    If a document is discovered to contain inappropriate material after
    it is published, that material should be removed from the document
    and all versions containing the inappropriate material removed from
    all FHISO-controlled archives.

If documents submitted for publication are discovered to violate any of
these criteria before they are published, they should be returned to the
submitter for revision.

6. Characteristics of Standards and the Standardisation process
===============================================================

All technical work conducted by the Family History Information Standards
Organisation or any of its constituent Technical Groups should conform
to the principles of open standards development.

Open Standards Development is characterised by by the Open Stand
community on http://open-stand.org/. They identify five salient
characteristics of open standards, reproduced below as sections 6.1
through 6.5. FHISO and the TSC are additionally committed to the
principles listed in section 6.6.

6.1. Cooperation
----------------

Respectful cooperation between standards organisations, whereby each
respects the autonomy, integrity, processes, and intellectual property
rules of the others.

6.2. Adherence to Principles
----------------------------

Adherence to the five fundamental principles of standards development:

Due process.
:   Decisions are made with equity and fairness among participants. No
    one party dominates or guides standards development. Standards
    processes are transparent and opportunities exist to appeal
    decisions. Processes for periodic standards review and updating are
    well defined.

Broad consensus.
:   Processes allow for all views to be considered and addressed, such
    that agreement can be found across a range of interests.

Transparency.
:   Standards organisations provide advance public notice of proposed
    standards development activities, the scope of work to be
    undertaken, and conditions for participation. Easily accessible
    records of decisions and the materials used in reaching those
    decisions are provided. Public comment periods are provided before
    final standards approval and adoption.

Balance.
:   Standards activities are not exclusively dominated by any particular
    person, company or interest group.

Openness.
:   Standards processes are open to all interested and informed parties.

6.3. Collective Empowerment
---------------------------

Commitment by affirming standards organisations and their participants
to collective empowerment by striving for standards that:

-   are chosen and defined based on technical merit, as judged by the
    contributed expertise of each participant;

-   provide global interoperability, scalability, stability, and
    resiliency;

-   enable global competition;

-   serve as building blocks for further innovation; and

-   contribute to the creation of global communities, benefiting
    humanity.

6.4. Availability
-----------------

Standards specifications are made accessible to all for implementation
and deployment. Affirming standards organisations have defined
procedures to develop specifications that can be implemented under fair
terms. Given market diversity, fair terms may vary from royalty-free to
fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory terms (FRAND).

6.5. Voluntary Adoption
-----------------------

Standards are voluntarily adopted and success is determined by the
market.

6.6. Additional Characteristics of FHISO's Technical Work
---------------------------------------------------------

Due process
:   Comments from members shall be considered and responded to.
    Objections shall be documented and the process shall seek to resolve
    them with the objector within reasonable time.

Requirements Driven Process
:   Technical solutions specified by standards shall be based on
    defined, and documented, requirements stated or confirmed by users,
    program vendors, service providers or other stakeholders.

International and non-discriminatory
:   The process and standards shall seek to engage participants from the
    whole international community, and shall seek to minimise the
    negative consequences of a single working language (English), thus
    allowing members who do not have English as their first language to
    participate on an equal basis. The same considerations apply to the
    negative consequences of different time zones.

Auditable Process
:   All organisational entities in FHISO involved in standardisation
    shall retain records to demonstrate

    1.  compliance with the procedures,
    2.  efforts to resolve potential conflicts, and
    3.  coordination with other standards activities.

    Such records shall be available for audit. To the extent possible
    and practical, the rationale for major decisions shall be documented
    so that succeeding groups do not have to reanalyse or re-justify
    decisions that were already made on a sound basis.

Stable Standards
:   Standards and standards versions should have a reasonably large
    expected lifetime, and new versions should not be published too
    frequently in order to reduce interoperability issues and
    implementation costs.

Complete Standards
:   The standards shall contain, or reference other publicly available
    standards that contain, all information in sufficient detail such
    that any two independent implementations of the standards can
    inter-operate without the need for additional agreements not
    explicitly identified by the standard.

Independent Standards
:   Standards shall not depend on any patented technology or other
    intellectual property held by other organisations. Preferably the
    technologies used should be in the public domain, but irrevocable
    and transferable royalty-free licenses may also be considered if no
    public domain solution is available.

Certifiable Standards
:   FHISO may develop requirements to, and procedures for, conformance
    testing services certifying software product or information
    services. Details of conformance testing, including who provides the
    testing services, may be defined and changed by the Board or the TSC
    based on need and the availability of resources.

A. Acronyms and definitions used in this document
=================================================

Call for Papers Submission:
:   A paper submitted to FHISO's Call for Papers

CFPS:
:   see Call for Papers Submission

Consensus:
:   Lack of "substantial opposition." A vote demonstrates sufficient
    consensus if less than 25% of votes cast are opposing (abstentions
    are not counted in the percentage). Censuses building should try to
    bring opposition to a minimum and not stop when 75% support is
    obtained. See also "Simple Majority"

EG:
:   see Exploratory Group

EG Associate Member
:   A member of an EG that is not a full member of FHISO. See the by-law
    5.2 and section 3.2 of this document for more.

Exploratory Group:
:   A group of at least three people who explore the potential for
    adding or modifying a project team. See section 3 for more.

Functional Requirement:
:   A description of some functionality that each implementation of a
    standard must supply. Functional requirements are one type of User
    Requirement.

Project Team:
:   A group of at least five people primarily responsible for a
    Technical Project. See section 4 for more.

PT:
:   see Project Team

Simple Majority:
:   A vote demonstrates simple majority if less than 50% of votes cast
    are opposing (abstentions are not counted in the percentage). For
    example, 5 votes of "yes", 4 votes of "no" and 3 abstentions is a
    simple majority (5 \> 4), but 6 "yes" and 6 "no" is not a simple
    majority. See also "Consensus."

Specification:
:   Something (usually a Functional Requirement) expressed in a formal,
    technical, mathematical, or otherwise unambiguous way. When not
    specifying a Functional Requirement, "specification" is often
    preceded by qualifying noun: for example, "precondition
    specification," "process specification," etc.

Standard:
:   A specification accepted by vote of the FHISO membership. Sometimes
    also used to describe a "candidate standard," a specification that a
    project team hopes will become a FHISO standard.

Technical Group:
:   A general term encompassing Exploratory Groups and Project Teams.
    The TSC can also be called a Technical Group.

Technical Project:
:   Any project supervised by the Technical Standing Committee. This
    includes efforts to define or refine a particular candidate standard
    or set of interrelated standards, but may also include other
    projects of TSC interest, such as educational initiatives,
    conference participation, internal infrastructure, certification
    projects, etc.

Technical Standing Committee:
:   A group of people primarily responsible for the oversight of Project
    Teams and Exploratory Groups, as well as for directing the focus of
    Technical Projects. See section 1.8, as well as the rest of this
    charter, for more.

TG:
:   see Technical Group

Transitional Member:
:   A member of a particular group who either recently joined that group
    or who failed to participate in the group for a period of at least a
    month during which two or more ballots were taken, and who has
    neither participated in two ballots nor participated in one month of
    group meetings since that joining or absence.

TSC:
:   see Technical Standing Committee

Voting Member:
:   A FHISO member eligible to vote on a particular issue. For proposed
    standards, this is any member of FHISO. For votes in a Technical
    Group or committee, this is any member of that group that is not a
    Transitional Member.


